Welcome to the session on combining commands
and files.
Linux is a modular operating system one can
combine different commands to achieve a complex
task.
One can also use multiple files for both input
and output in this session we will see how
we can combine both commands and files.
So, that a single command line could actually
achieve a fairly complex task.
So, here are few examples of how commands
can be combined on the command line the very
first way is something that we have already
seen you have the commands that are executed
one after other irrespective of whether the
commands have been successful or not.
Now the second means is where you have got
the two ampersand symbols which would lead
to an effect where the second command is executed
only if the first command is successful.
There is one more way of combining the commands
where you have got the two pipe symbols between
the two commands the second command would
be executed only if the first command were
to be false.
The written codes for each command something
that we have discussed in the previous session
would be very useful because if the written
code was 0 then it would be true and if it
were to be any other value greater than 0
then it would be false.
We could use the Boolean values indicated
by the written code to combine the commands
appropriately we could see that the double
ampersand as used for the and logical operator
and the double pipe that is used as our logical
operator could be then interpreted similar
to the Boolean variables combined in the same
manner.
We have seen in a previous session that we
can combine multiple commands on the command
line.
So, let us combine them for example ls and
then date command and then counting the number
of lines in a file called etc profile.
So, these three commands are then executed
irrespective of whether they are successful
or not.
So, let us make one of them fail.
So, we would type as a ls slash blah which
we know that does not exist and then edit
command and then wc -l etc profile.
And you see that the first command has failed
nevertheless the second and the third commands
have gone on to execute.
Now this is a behaviour that we could actually
change where the execution of the second or
third commands can depend on whether the first
command has been successful or not.
So, we will come to that in a moment but before
that I want to show you that there is one
more way by which you can execute three commands
on the command line together as a list of
tasks.
So, I would start them with a parenthesis
the bracket you could see that the same action
has been repeated.
So, there is no difference however when you
use the parenthesis what actually happens
is that the command is executed in a subshell
which is returned back to the shell that we
are using we can inspect the variable shell
variable called bash subshell.
So, this bash subshell is a variable that
contains an integer which tells you at what
level of execution we are.
So, let us try that out by passing it on to
the parenthesis to see whether the number
remains same or not.
So, I would now say echo.
Now you see that the number has changed which
means that this particular command has been
executed in a subshell and then is returned
back.
So, we could then use this to check how the
execution is happening when we pass multiple
commands and you could see that now the ls
and date were executed in a sub shell and
the value of a bash sub shell is then 1.
So, you could actually use multiple parentheses
to have subshells within subshells and we
can try that out right away.
Now you could actually create a sub shell
within this by editing it like this.
Now you see that the bash subshell is reporting
a value of 2 which means that from the bash
that we are actually in a subshell has been
created in which the ls command has been launched
and then another sub shell has been created
within which the date command has been launched.
So, we could verify that as follows.
So, you would see that the first command ls
is executed here and then the bash sub shell
shows that it is number one and then another
subshell has been spawned and the date command
has been executed and then the bash subshell
value is two which means that the date command
is executed in a shell launched two levels
below what we are actually running.
Now why is it useful?
Sometimes this is useful to ensure that the
environment within which the execution is
happening is closed it is not a good idea
to launch sub shells indefinitely because
each time a subshell is launched the environment
has to be prepared for that and therefore
it could be expensive computationally.
However it has certain usages where you could
provide a certain environment namely certain
values of the shell variables that are created
for a particular executable and so on.
To be provided so that the execution can happen
in a subshell without being interfered by
other variables that may be present in the
parent shell.
Now let us see if we can run the commands
where the execution depends upon the exit
status of one of the commands.
So, we have run two commands one after other
and we will.
Now make the first command fail and then we
will actually have ampersand twice to indicate
and operator and then we have the next command
date that is being executed.
Now you will see that only the error message
for the ls command has been displayed but
the date command did not execute what this
means is that the error code returned by the
ls command is false which means it is more
than 0 and therefore the second command namely
the date command did not execute.
Why is this useful?
Because it helps us in ensuring that the second
task which depends upon the first task will
execute only if the first one is successful.
Now let us look at a possibility that is exactly
the opposite.
So, here we are combining the commands where
we are using the double pipe which is for
the r operator and you see that the date command
has executed though the first command has
been a failure.
So, this is a situation where the second command
is like a plan b where if the first command
failed only then the second command would
execute.
I f the first command were to be successful
the second one will not be executed and that
is something that we can see right away and
you see that the ls command was successful
in displaying the list of files and directories
in the current directory and because it was
successful the second command date did not
execute.
So, here is a illustration where the three
symbols the semicolon the double ampersand
and the double pipe could be used to combine
commands in such a way that they can be executed
in three different means.
That is independent of the execution status
dependent on the execution status to be true
and dependent on the execution status to be
false.
So, now it is up to our imagination to combine
these in very many ways by which we can actually
achieve a complex task that depends upon the
commands that are executed before that let
us try that out once.
So, here I am running three commands and I
am using the and operator for all the three.
So, if any of them fail then the the next
set of commands on this command line will
not get executed.
So, we will make the first one fail that is
quite straightforward we just need to try
to list commands of a non-existing directory
therefore nothing after the ls command will
get executed.
Now we could actually make the first command
successful but the second one failed by giving
some arbitrary option which we know that will
not exist and you see that the date command
has been given an option -Q there is no such
option.
So, the date command has failed and therefore
after the date command the wc command did
not execute however the ls command went on
to execute successfully and that is why the
date command was tried out.
So, like this you can actually combine multiple
commands using both ampersands as well as
pipes to achieve the Boolean logic that you
would desire for the total command that you
want to execute which could be achieving a
fairly complex task.
Here we are using silly examples like ls or
date but it could actually be a bash scripts
that you would have written which actually
takes at an action on your data or processing
of some information that you have or perform
network operations and so on.
So, each of these commands can as well be
fairly complicated bash commands and the logic
of combining them on the command line would
remain the same.
Now we come to the concept of file descriptors.
So, in C language when you learnt how to read
and write content with the files then you
would have come across the concept of file
pointers where you have a file pointer pointing
to a file which you could read from or write
to.
So, every command in Linux has three file
descriptors they are called as the standard
in standard out standard err.
So, the standard in is a pointer to the stream
which is coming from the keyboard or the user
input and the standard out and standard err
are usually pointing to the screen where the
display of the output is made numerical values
like 0 1 2 are assigned to the file descriptors
standard in standard out and standard err
respectively.
So, that you could actually use these numerical
values on the command line for redirecting
some of those outputs are inputs to either
a file or a command.
Now in Linux we should imagine that each of
these three file pointers are actually looking
at only the stream of characters.
Now that we could understand that there are
these three file pointers.
The next thing that Linux provides us is that
we can redirect these three streams to either
a file or a command or the default behaviour
can also be left as it is and that opens up
a lot of possibilities for us to imagine how
the commands can be combined.
And there are certain operators that are used
to combine the commands and we will explore
them shortly.
So, here is the first operator that we are
going to use to combine a command and a file
that is the greater than symbol or the right
angle bracket.
So, what does it mean when we say when we
write a command like command greater than
file1 what happens is that the standard output
is redirected to a file called file1.
And the rest of the pointers will remain the
same which means that the input would continue
to come from the keyboard and if there is
any error that has come out of the running
the command that would come on to the screen
only the output is actually redirected to
the file.
Now the file will be created afresh in the
directory where the command is being executed
which means that you must have write permissions
to the directory and you should not have any
file by the same name already because it would
be overwritten when you run this command.
So, let us see this command in execution and
understand how does it work.
When you have a command that has a lot of
output and we would like to look at that output
slowly this feature of greater than symbol
to redirect the output to a file would be
very useful.
Now I am in the home directory and we would
actually look at the listing of the user bin
directory.
So, ls user bin and you see that a number
of files have come out of the screen and I
can actually do the same thing by typing -1
user bin it would give one command per line
of the output and we would like to then write
this output to a file.
So, that we could look at that file slowly
so that is where the greater than symbol comes
and then I have to give a file name.
So, I would give my file name as file1 and
then the file1 has been created and you can
see that there is no output on the screen.
The reason there is no output on the screen
is because there is no error that has actually
come when I executed this command.
Now I look at the contents of my home directory
and sure enough there is a file called file1
that has been created and it has 26 kilobytes
let us say quite a bit of a content because
there are lot of files in the user bin directory
of my computer and we can now inspect the
contents of file1 using the less command.
So, you can see that the list of file names
are being displayed on the screen.
And I can scroll through at my leisure I could
also go back with up arrow key and look at
them and I can press space bar to scroll page
by page and when I am done I can press q and
come out.
So, you can see that we have the ability to
pass on the output of a command onto the file.
Now if I happen to make an any error and there
is no output the file will be empty.
So, now you can see that the file1 is 26 kilobytes.
Now what I would do is I would actually intentionally
make an error.
So, I would try to list the contents of a
file called slash blah which does not exist
and I rewrite the output to file1.
Now what happens is that there is an error
and the error has actually come out to the
screen and we can inspect the contents of
the file1 and you see that it is zero that
means that there was no output naturally because
there is nothing to report as list of contents
for this slash directory which does not exist.
So, you can also see that a file which was
actually having 26 kilobytes has been overwritten
and it is now an empty file which means that
when you use the greater than symbol you must
be aware that any existing file will be overwritten
and therefore you should use fairly unique
file names when you are in the beginning stages.
So, that the danger of overwriting does not
hurt you in losing any of the files that may
be valuable to you.
So, this is what we have seen the command
is ls and the file1 is a text file and when
we ran it what happened is the output was
actually put in the file and any error was
actually put in the screen for us to view
and the command did not have any input and
therefore the standard in was not very relevant.
Now we will put the greater than symbol usage
to some use where we can actually look at
the output of a command which scrolls a bit
too fast.
So, let us do that with a command called hwinfo
and when you type that it is inspecting the
various hardware and it is now dumping the
output onto the screen.
So, we then write the same command greater
than and I need to give a file name because
this is useful information I would like to
type it as hwinfo dot txt to indicate that
it is a text file and it has the information
coming from the command hwinfo and you could
see that there is nothing on the screen.
Now because everything has been put onto the
file, now let me look at the file by using
the less command and you see that it is giving
me information about the system and you see
that it is telling me about the kernel that
was booted and initially how the probing of
the hardware is happening and as you scroll
through you will see information about your
computer hardware and we will look at that
in the next session to inspect the computer
hardware.
But for now you could actually see that the
content can be made available for you to read
at your leisure.
Now if you try this command in a folder where
you do not have a write permission you will
get an error and let us just check that out
also.
So, we would go to let us say slash user and
we would actually look at the permissions
whether we have write permissions or not and
you see that the current directory has write
permission only for the root and I am not
root right now.
Who am I?
I am another user and therefore I do not have
a write permission because the file is owned
by root and only the owner has write permission
and I belong to the other category and I do
not have the right permission.
So, here if I try to run the command then
I will get an error.
So, let us say I type ls greater than and
then file1 and you see that permission denied
is the error that I get it is good because
I do not unintentionally make any changes
to the system folders.
And this is a security measure that is built
in and that is one of the reasons why we should
not be logged in as a root user with administrative
privileges when we are a novice user unknowingly
sometimes we may make some errors.
So, before you run the command you always
ensure where are you and when you are in your
home directory then you can do these commands
without any error.
Now the greater than symbol can also be used
to actually create files.
So, let us look at the help for the cat command
and it says concatenate files and print on
the standard output and which actually can
be interpreted with respect to the information
that we have about a command.
So, we have cat and then greater than and
then a file okay.
So, what happens when we type this command
is that the cat command is supposed to receive
the input from a file that is listed on the
command line.
But we did not specify any file if you did
not specify a file on the command line for
the cat command to read the content then it
would read that content from the keyboard
which means it is reading from the standard
in and we can then see how we can type some
command which will then go into the file called
file1 because the greater than symbol indicates
that whatever cat is supposed to display will
be put into the file1.
So, you see that the command prompt is now
empty and it is expecting us to type some
we can type some content now.
So, that is my first line second line goes
like this
and how do I come out you could come out using
control plus d option okay.
So, I do that.
Now and I have come out now what happened
is that the three lines I have typed have
been read by the command cat and they are
supposed to be displayed onto the screen.
But because of the greater than symbol they
are being redirected to file1.
So, let us look at the contents of the file1
you see that the file1 has 170 bytes it is
a short file and as we have already mentioned
earlier it has been overwritten by this command
because earlier it had some other content.
So, we have overwritten it.
So, that is not a problem because these are
all only meant for practice.
But remember always that whenever you use
greater than symbol that file will be created
afresh and if a file exists by that name it
will be overwritten.
Let us look at the contents of the file file1
and you see that what we have typed is there
now on the screen for us to see.
Now you can see that the difference between
cat greater than file1 and a cat file1.
So, it actually what it does is that greater
than actually would take input from the keyboard
and create a new file by the name file1 whereas
without the greater than symbol the content
of the file 1 will be displayed onto the screen.
So, it is very important for us to understand
how the file pointers are actually being redirected.
So, here you can see that by default the cad
command was taking input from the standard
in keyboard and it was writing it out onto
the screen but we have put a greater than
symbol.
So, it was writing on to the file1.
Now let us test our understanding of the input
output redirection by seeing what happens
when we just say type cat.
What happens is that there is no file specified
on the command line which means that the input
for the cat command should come from the keyboard
and the output should also be on the screen.
So, which means that the command would now
take input from the keyboard and place the
output on to the screen and let us see how
that happens.
So, as soon as I press enter you see that
that particular line has been read and it
is displayed onto the screen.
So, you can see that this command is actually
processing the text line by line and you can
actually finish up this task by actually pressing
ctrl D, so that you can come out of the command.
So, finish up by end of the file using control
+D to close.
So, now I press ctrl D and what happens is
that it has already finished writing the content
on the screen.
So, there is nothing that has happened.
So, this actually helps you understand how
the file pointers are being interpreted.
So, there are three file pointers standard
in standard out and standard error and we
have to be very conscious which file pointer
is pointing to which of the aspects namely
the keyboard or the screen or the file you
could actually use two symbols of greater
than or the right angle bracket.
So, if you use these two symbols side by side
without any space between them the interpretation
is that the output of the command should be
appended to the file1 by appended we mean
if the file1 exists then the content will
be written to the bottom of the file and if
the file1 does not exist then it will be created
and it will be written from the top.
So, it means that it is a bit it is a slightly
safer option to use.
So, that if there was any file then it would
not be overwritten it will only be appended
to okay.
So, that is why here in the graphic I have
shown the arrow pointing to the bottom of
the file1 not to the top and that is a hint
that the content will be appended to the file1
and not replaced the warning of the file1
to be created remains and you will have errors
if you run this command in a directory where
you do not have permissions to create the
file1 because you do not own that particular
directory.
Now let us try out the double greater than
symbol to see how to append the content of
any file by using the commands and the output
would be written to that file in an appending
mode.
So, let us try that out.
So, I have this file1 and file two I will
just erase all of those okay.
Now I do not have any files.
So, I now use the command to also show you
how it will be created when it does not exist.
So, what we do is we type date and double
greater than and we'll say file1 and you see
that a file has been created.
Now afresh though we have used the double
greater than symbol because if the file was
not existing it will be created and if it
was available then it will be appended to.
So, I run the command again.
Now and once more and once more I have run
totally four times.
So, let us look at the contents of that particular
file and you see that there are four lines
and from the seconds you can make out that
it is actually appending one after other.
So, this way we have not lost the content
that was appended or inserted earlier and
therefore this mode is preferable when you
want to preserve the contents of the file
while redirecting the output of a command
to a particular file that you want to inspect
later.
So, when you want to write multiple commands
where the output would be redirected to the
file and appended later on with another command
then you could combine all of them also in
the same line using the semicolon as follows.
So, you would type date and let us say file
two and then we have another command let us
say wc -l and then a third command perhaps
to inspect the file user bin znew and that
output also I would like to write to file2.
So, you can see that I am combining three
commands and the output of each of those is
being written to the file and then I can actually
look at the content of the file too and you
could see that the three outputs have been
appended and we are seeing all of them.
Now what I would do is I would make an intentional
mistake here the second one I would actually
make with only one greater than symbol and
you.
Now see what would happen you see that only
the second and third outputs are there.
The output of the first date command is gone
because the second command has actually overwritten
it because it has created the file to affect
okay.
So, this is how you should interpret the greater
than symbols.
So, double greater than and the greater than
both will actually create the file if it was
not existing but double greater than would
actually append if the file was already existing
and therefore the safer option for you to
explore.
Now we will use the same double greater than
symbol to append text to a file that we are
creating.
So, we would remove these files.
Now we would actually try to append to a file
and the file does not exist initially it does
not matter.
So, I will have file1 and I want to write
something here.
So, I would write like this okay first attempt
to add text to the file file1.
Now I come out using control +D. Now I have
come out.
So, I would run this command once more.
Now I say this is my second attempt to append
text to the file called file1.
We can inspect the content using cad or less
or more commands okay I come out using control
+ D. So, we have done two attempts.
So, we would do one more this is the third
attempt to append content to the file called
file1.
So, we have.
Now done three attempts and let us see what
is the content of the file1 and you see that
all the lines are there all the six lines
are there the first attempt had these three
lines which are now reproduced here.
The second attempt had these three lines and
they are here now and the third attempt had
only one line and that line is here.
So, you can see that you could use the cat
command to append text to your file.
So, you can actually create files with the
text that you want to create in it by using
the cat command the double greater than symbol
to append and this is one very simple way
by which you can create text files.
We will learn how to edit these files in a
visual environment within the command line
in one of the sessions later on but this is
a very quick and dirty way by which you can
actually create text files and append stuff
to that one by one.